.TH HASHI 1 "2026-01-25" "hashi v0.0.23" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hashi \- An intuitive, human-first command-line hash comparison tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hashi
[\fIFLAGS\fR] [\fIFILES\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hashi
is a robust hashing utility designed for both human readability and machine automation. It supports multiple algorithms, advanced filtering, and incremental operations via manifests.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Global Flags
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and examples.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show application version.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output, including detailed error messages.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress all stdout. Only errors go to stderr.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-bool
Boolean output mode. Prints "true" if hashes match, "false" otherwise.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-recursive
Traverse directories recursively.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-algorithm " \fIALGORITHM\fR"
Hash algorithm to use: sha256 (default), md5, sha1, sha512, blake2b.
.TP
.BR \-\-hidden
Process hidden files and directories.
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
Preview which files would be processed without hashing them.
.TP
.BR \-\-preserve\-order
Maintain input order instead of grouping matching files together.

.SS Output Flags
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " \fIFORMAT\fR"
Output format: default, verbose, json, jsonl, plain.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " \fIFILE\fR"
Write hashing results to the specified file.
.TP
.BR \-\-append
Append to the output file instead of overwriting.
.TP
.BR \-\-force
Force overwrite of output files without prompting.

.SS Filtering Flags
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-include " \fIPATTERN\fR"
Only include files matching the glob pattern.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-exclude " \fIPATTERN\fR"
Skip files matching the glob pattern.
.TP
.BR \-\-min\-size " \fISIZE\fR"
Skip files smaller than SIZE (e.g., 1MB, 500KB).
.TP
.BR \-\-max\-size " \fISIZE\fR"
Skip files larger than SIZE.
.TP
.BR \-\-modified\-after " \fIDATE\fR"
Only process files modified after YYYY-MM-DD.

.SS Incremental Flags
.TP
.BR \-\-manifest " \fIFILE\fR"
Load baseline hashes and metadata from FILE.
.TP
.BR \-\-only\-changed
Only process files that differ from the loaded manifest.
.TP
.BR \-\-output\-manifest " \fIFILE\fR"
Save processing results as a JSON manifest for future incremental runs.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Hash all files in the current directory:
.B hashi
.TP
Compare two files:
.B hashi file1.txt file2.txt
.TP
Check if a file matches a known hash:
.B hashi file.txt e3b0c44298fc...
.TP
Find duplicate images recursively:
.B hashi -r --include "*.jpg" images/
.TP
Incremental backup check:
.B hashi -r --manifest baseline.json --only-changed --output-manifest new-baseline.json

.SH SECURITY
Hashi is read-only on all input files. It automatically prevents overwriting sensitive configuration files (like .env or .ssh/config) unless explicitly allowed in the project's security policy.

.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
No matches found (when using \-\-match\-required) or hash mismatch.
.TP
.B 2
Partial failure. Some files could not be read.
.TP
.B 3
Invalid arguments or flag conflicts.
.TP
.B 4
File not found.
.TP
.B 5
Permission denied.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by Ctrl-C.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by hashi AI team.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report issues at https://github.com/Les-El/hashi/issues
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026. MIT License.
